Hello, hello, hello, and welcome
to English Learning for Curious
Minds, by Leonardo English, the show
where you can listen to fascinating
stories and learn weird and wonderful
things about the world at the same
time as improving your English.
I'm Alastair Budge, and today
we are going to be talking
about The Affair Of The Poisons.
It's an almost unbelievable story
involving the king of France, black
magic, deceit, gossip, the Parisian
underworld, murder, torture, affairs
and, of course, plenty of poison.
So, let’s not waste a minute,
and get right into it.
There are many phrases in English that
we use to convey the idea that the
person at the top of an organisation,
whether that’s a family, a company,
or even a country, that this person
should set an example for how to behave.
You can say “set an example”, or
“lead by example”, or “set the tone”,
and no doubt there are plenty of
similar phrases in your language.
It is a universal truth; whatever
the person at the top does, that
tends to be the example that is
followed by those within their orbit.
In 17th-century France, and to be more
precise, in the 17th-century French
court, that person was King Louis XIV.
He was the centre of everything.
Just as the planets revolve around
the sun, so too did the entire
French court revolve around Louis.
He wasn’t simply a monarch.
He was France; the state, the culture,
the fashion, the morality, even the
gossip, it all radiated outward from him.
He called himself le Roi Soleil — the
Sun King — and was a firm believer
that he had been chosen by God
to rule France, according to the
so-called “Divine Right of Kings”.
And of course, this god-given right was
absolute; nothing else, not the church,
not the nobility, even came close to the
power that should be wielded by the king.
One of the ways he did this was
by bringing the nobility to him.
No longer would powerful nobles rule
distant corners of the country; they
would all live at court, with the king,
or at least they would if they wanted
to have any kind of influence or power.
And the centre of this power and influence
would be the Palace at Versailles,
which Louis turned from a respectable
chateau into a vast royal residence,
and a glittering stage from which
to project his power and splendour.
And the French aristocracy,
desperate to remain close to him,
played their roles accordingly.
Life at court was a performance.
Every look, every gesture,
every word had meaning.
But behind the dazzling chandeliers
and golden mirrors, it was also a world
of extreme excess and moral decay.
Louis had dozens of mistresses,
with eight listed on his Wikipedia
page as “among the better known”.
Strangely enough, if you switch over to
his French-language Wikipedia page, you’ll
find 14 mistresses, instead of eight.
No doubt there’s a joke
in there somewhere…
Anyway, some of these mistresses
were official, some unofficial,
merely whispered about in the
shadows, and no doubt there were
more who were unknown altogether.
Of those official, or semi-official
ones, each brought with her a
retinue of hangers-on and followers.
All of these mistresses competed
for the king’s attention with
jewels, flattery, and favours.
It was a kind of soft warfare, played
out in silk and perfume, in secret
corridors and garden pavilions.
At the same time, nobles were kept
busy with endless court rituals,
distracted with pleasures, and in
a seemingly never-ending game of
spending one-upmanship, ostentatious
displays of wealth and excess.
They gambled away fortunes at the gaming
tables, dressed in costumes that cost more
than a village, and whispered behind fans
as they plotted ways to climb the social
ladder or planned their rivals’ downfalls.
This was a world where appearances
were everything, and survival depended
on who you knew, how you charmed,
and how far you were willing to go.
And when charm wasn’t enough,
some turned to darker methods.
Love potions.
Spells.
Magical powders.
Rituals.
And poisons.
Because if power flowed from the king,
and you couldn’t reach him with wit or
beauty, perhaps there were other ways.
This was the backdrop to The Affair of
the Poisons, a scandal that began in the
shadows of Paris, but crept ever closer
to Versailles, threatening to unravel the
illusion of divine order and perfection
that Louis had spent decades crafting.
It all started in 1672, with the
death of a dashing young cavalry
officer named Godin de Sainte-Croix.
Now, nothing appeared to be particularly
strange about this man’s death, but
when his belongings were collected,
a red leather trunk was found.
Inside were a series of love letters
between him and an aristocratic married
woman named Marie de Brinvilliers.
Now, this was 17th-century France;
it would probably have been more
unusual if he hadn’t had a lover.
But upon further inspection,
the trunk contained something
far more incriminating.
A collection of vials containing
strange substances: potions and poisons.
The young cavalry officer had spent
some time in prison, and there he
had reportedly got to know an Italian
master-poisoner, a man who knew how to
prepare different natural ingredients,
powders, and liquids to kill.
The letters exchanged between the
two lovers revealed that the pair
had spent several years honing their
craft, scientifically testing different
combinations, and doing practical
experiments on unwitting subjects.
According to one report, Marie de
Brinvilliers would choose one of
her concoctions, add it to a cake
or biscuit mixture, and then turn
up at the Hôtel-Dieu, a large public
hospital on the bank of the Seine.
As a member of the French nobility, and
without much else to do, she would be
allowed to stroll up and down the hospital
wards, visiting the sick and giving them
token gifts: biscuits, cakes, and so on.
To someone recovering from illness in
a cold and damp hospital bed, it must
have been a welcome diversion to have
someone come and talk to you, bringing
you delicious treats that you might
never have been able to afford yourself.
But it was, of course, not
particularly nice to find yourself
dead a matter of hours afterwards.
Now, it’s not known how long
this went on for, or how many
innocent patients she murdered.
It seems that nobody noticed, or at least
nobody seemed to question why people
didn’t survive for long after tasting
one of Marie de Brinvilliers’ biscuits.
These people were in hospital already,
it wasn’t so improbable that they would
die there, and besides, an aristocratic
young woman would never have been
considered capable of doing such a thing.
It was simply not in the female character,
especially of a lady of such noble birth.
Or so people thought…
And if this wasn’t bad enough, there
were more letters in the trunk, letters
that revealed that sickly strangers
hadn’t been the only victims of Marie
de Brinvilliers’ poisonous concoctions.
The letter revealed that she had also
murdered her father and her two brothers,
not out of spite or hatred, but for
financial gain; she wanted the family
fortune for herself and her children.
When her lover was found dead,
probably by accidentally poisoning
himself, she must have realised
that their secret would be revealed.
She fled, hiding in England for four
years, before being arrested in Belgium.
During all of this time, she had been
keeping a sort of journal with her
various confessions, and in it she
detailed how she had also tried to
poison her sister-in-law and her husband.
The game was up.
She was condemned to death, but
she was first to be subjected to
something called “the water cure”,
which was a kind of horrible torture
where she was forced to drink 13 and
a half litres of water, stretching
her stomach to the point of agony.
Then, she was taken to a public
square–Place de Grève–her hair shaved, her
head chopped off, and her remains burned.
And this might have seemed like an
isolated case–a murderous couple
who thought they would never be
caught–but it turned out to be the
start of something much bigger.
According to one report, before she
was condemned to death, she said,
“Out of so many guilty people, must
I be the only one to be put to death?
… Half the people in town are involved
in this sort of thing, and I could
ruin them all if I were to talk.”
End quote.
Half the people in town, meaning
half the people in Paris, would
have meant around 300,000 people
poisoning family members and murdering
unsuspecting hospital patients.
Clearly, this was something of
an exaggeration, but it turned
out that it wasn’t so far off.
According to one French historian,
there were 400 witches and warlocks
active in the capital at this time.
Now, these weren’t cartoon-type
witches; women in dark robes
with pointed hats and black cats.
But they did have cauldrons, or at
least, one of their core specialities
was the preparation of mysterious
potions to heal, to make you more
attractive, to force someone to fall
in love with you, or indeed, to kill.
The true extent of this seedy underworld
started to be unravelled after another
woman, Magdelaine de La Grange, was
arrested on the charge of poisoning
her lover, and she said pretty much the
same thing as Marie de Brinvilliers,
to paraphrase: “everyone’s doing it”.
Word reached Louis XIV, and he ordered
his chief of police, Gabriel Nicolas de
La Reynie, to launch a full investigation.
Now, de La Reynie had made a name
for himself as a man who had “cleaned
up” Paris; he reformed the police
force, made sure the city was properly
lit, and restored some semblance
of law and order to the city.
But there was still this underworld
that he didn’t fully understand,
and he was given the task of
getting to the bottom of it.
To deal with the fallout of this
investigation, Louis XIV created
a secretive tribunal called the
Chambre Ardente, or “Burning
Chamber,” so-named for the torch-lit
basement where its judges met.
Over the next three years, this would
be the centre of the investigation,
an investigation that uncovered the
true extent of 17th-century France’s
obsession with the supernatural.
And what de La Reynie and this
tribunal found was shocking.
Fortune tellers, alchemists, all sorts
of fraudsters and charlatans, and a
bustling industry in the heart of Paris.
But there was an even more sinister side.
Alongside the people selling fake cures
for headaches or lovesickness, there
were others preparing deadly poisons,
performing backroom abortions, and even
conducting so-called “black masses”.
What really happened at these “black
masses” is something of a mystery,
but it’s thought that they would
involve an altar set up in a bedroom,
a naked woman stretched across it, a
chalice placed on her body, and, in
some cases, the blood of a sacrificed
infant used to invoke dark powers.
And one of the women at the centre of
this, Paris’s most famous alchemist,
poisoner, abortionist and conductor
of black masses, was a woman named
Catherine Monvoisin, or simply “La
Voisin”, the neighbour, in English.
Men and women of Parisian high society
would go to La Voisin for anything:
fortune telling, love potions, medical
treatments, abortions, black masses;
there was practically no procedure
that was beyond her stated abilities.
Now, there are certainly plenty of
question marks as to whether her
incantations, love potions or medical
treatments had any effect whatsoever.
Unfortunately, there is little
debate when it comes to things like
abortions or the preparation of
poison: she is estimated to have been
responsible for the deaths of anywhere
between 1,000 and 2,500 individuals.
She must have thought herself to
be invincible; after all, she had
grown fabulously wealthy, she was
providing a service to those at the
very top of French society, and had
people queuing around the block.
But, on the 12th of March 1679,
fresh out of mass, she was
arrested on the church's steps.
In the months that followed,
she was interrogated.
Interestingly enough, La Voisin wasn’t
subjected to torture for most of her
imprisonment, perhaps because the
authorities feared what she might
reveal, potentially information that
might incriminate high-ranking members
of the French aristocracy, perhaps even
members of King Louis’s inner circle.
But during her final interrogation, in
February 1680, she was put to the boot
torture: a brutal method designed to
crush the legs and force confessions.
Even then, she refused to name specific
clients, only admitting that, and I’m
quoting directly, “ a great number
of persons of every sort of rank
and condition addressed themselves
to her to seek the death of or to
find the means to kill many people”.
In other words, rich and poor, of
noble birth and normal people, came
to seek her poisonous services.
Now, it’s worth pausing for a moment
to talk about why so many people,
especially women, turned to poison.
It wasn’t that they were cold-hearted
murderers, but rather, it was
often a desperate act of rebellion.
In 17th-century France, women had little
legal or financial power, and were trapped
under the thumb of husbands or fathers.
If they were cut out of wills, or
abused by their fathers, brothers
or husbands, there was precious
little they could do about it.
Poison became a secret weapon to escape
abusive marriages, secure wealth, or
defy a system that left them powerless.
And it worked very well.
Poisons like arsenic were
nearly impossible to detect.
They were tasteless, odourless, and
invisible in autopsies, so people who
were murdered by poison would typically be
written off as dying of ‘natural causes’.
And La Voisin was one of
the women who made it all
possible, for a while at least.
In February of 1680, nearly a year
after her arrest, she too was led to
Place de Grève–the same square where de
Brinvilliers had been beheaded four years
earlier–and she was burned at the stake.
She had taken the names of her
trusted clients to the grave with
her, but just a few months later, the
identity of one would be revealed.
La Voisin’s daughter confessed the name
of one of her mother’s most secretive
clients: Madame de Montespan, who just
so happened to be one of Louis XIV’s
favourite mistresses, and the mother
of seven of his illegitimate children.
According to witnesses, she had first
sought out La Voisin in 1667 to conduct
a series of “black masses”, with the
objective of winning the king’s love.
She also asked La Voisin to prepare
a series of aphrodisiacs–magic
potions–which she arranged to be
slipped into his drink and food.
Sure enough, a year later, she was
added to his long list of mistresses.
Now, the fact that she was prepared to
go to the length of organising these
pseudo-religious dark rituals and
procuring aphrodisiacs probably gives
you an idea of her determination to
seduce the King, and his extensive list
of mistresses suggests that it might not
have been the toughest job in the world.
But she clearly thought her
success with the King was due
to La Voisin’s magic powers.
And after the pair had become
lovers, her relationship with La
Voisin became even more important.
Whenever there was any kind of issue
between her and the king, between
her and a rival for the king’s
affections, or an issue with anyone
else at court, she would turn to her
trusted back-street witch, La Voisin.
There are even reports that she
turned to her to poison the king.
Louis was clearly not a man who
put a great emphasis on loyalty and
monogamy, and only a few years after
Madame de Montespan had become his
lover, did his eyes start to wander,
and he started to lose interest.
Together with La Voisin, de
Montespan dreamed up a plan to
poison one of her rivals, and it
has even been alleged that they had
planned to poison the king himself.
If he was going to desert her, he must
pay the price, so the theory goes.
Fortunately for Louis, at least,
La Voisin was arrested and
executed before this could happen.
And as for Madame de Montespan and her
other poison-loving colleagues at court?
If this information had got out,
it would have been scandalous.
But it didn’t.
The investigation continued, but quietly.
Arrests were made, but names were
omitted from the public record.
Madame de Montespan was never
formally charged, but soon after,
she lost her influence at court.
And in 1682, the same year that the royal
court officially moved to Versailles,
the full investigation was closed.
By then, the Chambre Ardente
had charged 442 people.
Thirty-six were executed.
Dozens more were imprisoned
for life or exiled.
And countless others — especially
among the nobility — simply
vanished from the record.
The scandal was swept
under the royal carpet.
This all coincided with the royal court’s
official move to Versailles, a carefully
stage-managed shift to an image of
splendour, and perhaps an ideal moment
to quietly bury the affair, along with
any remaining embarrassing secrets.
Not forgotten, exactly, but filed away.
A stain on the Sun King’s
legacy that no amount of gold
or glitter could fully erase.
And yet, the Affair of the Poisons
is a reminder not just about
Louis XIV and his court, but
perhaps about human nature itself.
That beneath the surface of the most
refined societies, behind the manners,
the titles, the rituals, there can lie
a deep current of desperation — to be
seen, to be loved, to hold on to power.
And when the stakes are high
enough, people will often
turn to the darkest of means.
OK, then, that is it for today's
episode on the Affair of the Poisons.
If you enjoyed this story and you
haven’t had enough of mysteries at
the French court, you might like to
listen to episode number 479, about
the Affair of the Diamond Necklace.
There’s less poison, but there
are affairs, a king called
Louis, criminals, and of course
a very large diamond necklace.
I’ll put a link to that below, or you
can just search for it on the website.
It’s Episode number 479 and it’s called
the Affair of the Diamond Necklace.
You've been listening to English Learning
for Curious Minds by Leonardo English.
I'm Alastair Budge, you stay safe, and
I'll catch you in the next episode.